UNIT 1 — FUNDAMENTALS OF
PROGRAMMING
Complete Consolidated Notes — All Uploaded Topics
Combined directly from Unit-1-Part-1, Unit-1-Part-2 and Unit-1-Part-3.
Problem Solving Techniques
Outline
Skills Required for Software Engineers
Types of Problems
Computational Problems
Problem Solving Life Cycle
Logic
Algorithms
Flowcharts
Programming Languages
Programming Environments
Pseudocode
Learning Outcomes
Understand what problem solving means.
Identify different types of problems.
Understand computational problems.
Explain the problem-solving life cycle.
Differentiate between positive and negative logic.
Design algorithms and flowcharts.
Write simple pseudocode.
Understand programming environments.
What is Problem Solving?
Definition
Problem solving is the process of identifying a problem, analyzing it, and finding the most effective solution.
In Computer Science,
Problem solving means converting a real-world problem into a sequence of logical steps that a computer can execute.
Example
Problem:
Find the largest number among three numbers.
Number is positive or negative (Flowchart)
Number is positive or negative (Algorithm)
Step 1: Read no.
Step 2: If no. is greater than equal zero,
go to step 4.
Step 3: Print no. is a negative number,
go to step 5.

Step 4: Print no. is a positive number.
Step 5: Stop.
Why is Problem Solving Important?
Why is Problem Solving Important?
Problem solving is one of the most essential skills for every software engineer. Every software application is designed to solve a
specific problem faced by users or organizations. A programmer's job is not just to write code but to analyze problems, design
efficient solutions, and implement them correctly.
Importance of Problem Solving
Helps understand the real problem before writing code.
Reduces errors and improves software quality.
Saves development time and cost.
Produces efficient and optimized solutions.
Makes programs easier to maintain and update.
Enhances logical and analytical thinking.
Why is Problem Solving Important?
Real-World Examples
Skills Required for a Software Engineer
Skills Required for a Software Engineer
A successful software engineer requires a combination of technical knowledge, logical thinking, and interpersonal abilities. These
skills help in designing, developing, testing, and maintaining software effectively.
Three Major Skill Categories
Technical Skills: Knowledge of programming languages, software tools, databases, operating systems, and modern technologies
required to build software.
Problem Solving Skills: The ability to analyze problems, think logically, and develop efficient algorithms and solutions.
Soft Skills: Personal and professional skills that help software engineers communicate, collaborate, and work effectively in teams.
Skills Required for a Software Engineer
Example
A software engineer developing an Online Shopping Application needs:
Technical Skills → Java, SQL, Database, APIs
Problem Solving Skills → Design efficient search and payment algorithms
Soft Skills → Communicate with clients and work with teammates
Technical Skills
Technical skills are the knowledge and practical abilities required to design, develop, test, and maintain software applications.
These skills are acquired through education, practice, and hands-on experience.
Major Technical Skills
Programming Languages (C, C++, Java, Python)
Data Structures and Algorithms (DSA)
Database Management Systems (MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle)
Operating Systems (Windows, Linux)
Computer Networks
Version Control (Git & GitHub)
Software Development Tools (Visual Studio Code, Eclipse)
Debugging and Testing
Web and Mobile Development Basics

Technical Skills
Why are Technical Skills Important?
Convert ideas into software.
Improve coding efficiency.
Reduce software bugs.
Build secure and scalable applications.
Adapt to new technologies.
Problem Solving Skills
Problem-solving skills are the abilities that help a software engineer identify a problem, analyze its causes, think logically, and
develop the most efficient solution.
A programmer's primary responsibility is not only to write code but also to solve real-world problems using computational thinking.
Key Problem-Solving Skills
Analytical Thinking
Logical Reasoning
Critical Thinking
Algorithm Design
Decision Making
Debugging Skills
Creativity and Innovation
Attention to Detail
Problem Solving Skills
Example
Problem: A website takes 15 seconds to load.
A good software engineer will:
Analyze the problem.
Identify the bottleneck (database, network, or code).
Evaluate multiple solutions.
Select the most efficient solution.
Test the improvement.
Problem Solving Process
Steps in Problem Solving
Every software engineer follows a structured process to solve problems effectively.
Characteristics of a Good Problem Solver
A successful software engineer develops habits that improve the quality of solutions.
Essential Characteristics
Thinks logically before coding.
Breaks complex problems into smaller parts.
Considers multiple solution approaches.
Chooses the most efficient algorithm.
Learns from mistakes and debugging.
Continuously improves existing solutions.
Remains patient while solving difficult problems.

Soft Skills
Soft skills are personal, interpersonal, and communication skills that enable software engineers to work effectively with
colleagues, clients, and stakeholders.
Unlike technical skills, soft skills focus on how you work with people rather than technology.
Important Soft Skills
Communication Skills
Teamwork
Leadership
Time Management
Adaptability
Problem Ownership
Professional Ethics
Emotional Intelligence
Important Soft Skills for Software Engineers
Why Soft Skills Matter in the Software Industry
Importance of Soft Skills
Technical knowledge alone is not enough to become a successful software engineer.
Employers also evaluate how candidates communicate, collaborate, and solve workplace challenges.
Benefits of Strong Soft Skills
Better teamwork and collaboration.
Effective communication with clients.
Improved leadership potential.
Faster conflict resolution.
Better project management.
Increased career growth opportunities.
Higher customer satisfaction.
Identify the Required Skill
Problem and Types of Problems
A problem is a situation where there is a difference between the current state and the desired (expected) state, requiring a
solution to achieve the desired outcome.
In computer science, a problem is a task or challenge that can be solved using logical thinking, algorithms, and programming.
General Structure of a Problem
Every problem consists of four basic components:
Current State – The existing situation.
Desired State (Goal) – The expected outcome.
Obstacles or Constraints – Factors that make the goal difficult to achieve.
Solution – A sequence of steps to overcome the obstacles.
Problem and Types of Problems
Example: Student Examination
Types of Problems
Classification of Problems
Problems can be classified into three major categories:

1. Social Problems
Problems that affect society or communities.
2. Management Problems
Problems related to planning, organizing, controlling, and decision-making in organizations.
3. Computational Problems
Problems that can be solved using computers, algorithms, and programming.
Social Problems
A social problem is an issue that affects a large number of people and negatively impacts society. These problems often require
collective efforts from governments, organizations, and individuals.
Characteristics
Affect communities or society.
May involve economic, environmental, or cultural factors.
Often require long-term solutions.
Technology can assist but cannot solve them alone.
Social Problems
Technology-Based Solutions
Management Problems
Management problems involve the efficient planning, organizing, coordinating, and controlling of resources within an organization.
These problems focus on improving productivity, reducing costs, and making informed decisions.
Characteristics
Occur in businesses and organizations.
Involve resource allocation.
Require decision-making.
Often solved using Management Information Systems (MIS).
Management Problems
Examples
Employee scheduling
Payroll processing
Inventory management
Customer relationship management
Budget planning
Supply chain management
Computational Problems
A computational problem is a problem that can be solved using algorithms, data structures, and computer programs.
The solution is represented as a sequence of logical instructions that a computer can execute.
Characteristics
Clearly defined inputs and outputs.
Solved using computational methods.
Can be automated.
Requires algorithm design.
Computational Problems

Examples
Finding the largest number.
Searching for a student's record.
Sorting employee salaries.
Calculating electricity bills.
Predicting weather.
Face recognition.
Route optimization in Google Maps.
Spam email detection.
Comparison of Problem Types
Computational Problem Types
Types of Computational Problems
Computational problems are classified based on the type of output required.
The five commonly encountered computational problems are:
Decision Problems
Searching Problems
Sorting Problems
Counting Problems
Optimization Problems
Decision Problems
A decision problem is a computational problem where the output is one of two possible answers, typically Yes/No, True/False, or
Accept/Reject.
Characteristics
Binary outcome.
Uses logical conditions.
Commonly implemented using if-else statements.
Examples
Is the entered password correct?
Searching Problems
A searching problem involves locating a required item within a collection of data.
Objective
Find whether the required element exists and determine its position.
Examples
Search a student by roll number.
Sorting Problems
Sorting is the process of arranging data in a specified order.
Types
Ascending Order
Descending Order
Example
Before Sorting
56 12 89 24 35

After Sorting (Ascending)
12 24 35 56 89
Sorting Problems
Why Sorting is Important?
Makes searching faster.
Improves data organization.
Simplifies report generation.
Enhances database performance.
Common Sorting Algorithms
Bubble Sort
Selection Sort
Insertion Sort
Merge Sort
Quick Sort
Counting Problems
A counting problem involves determining the total number of occurrences or items that satisfy a specific condition.
Examples
Count the number of students who passed.
Example
Array
5 8 12 17 22 31
Even numbers:
8 12 22
Count = 3
Optimization Problems
An optimization problem aims to find the best possible solution among many feasible solutions while satisfying given constraints.
The objective may be to minimize or maximize a particular value.
Objectives
Minimize cost
Minimize time
Minimize distance
Maximize profit
Maximize efficiency
Optimization Problems
Problem-Solving Life Cycle
The Problem-Solving Life Cycle is a systematic approach used to solve problems efficiently. It ensures that solutions are logical,
accurate, and easy to implement.
Problem-Solving Life Cycle
Problem-Solving Life Cycle
Example – Student Result System
Identify the need to calculate grades.

Analyze grading rules.
Design the grading logic.
Write the algorithm.
Create a flowchart.
Develop the program in C.
Test with different marks.
Deploy to the college portal.
Update grading rules when the university changes its policy.
Logic and Problem-Solving Tools Introduction to Logic
What is Logic?
Logic is a systematic way of thinking and reasoning that helps us reach a correct conclusion or make a correct decision.
In problem solving, logic helps us determine:
What needs to be done?
In what order should it be done?
What conditions need to be checked?
What should happen when a condition is true or false?
Logic and Problem-Solving Tools Introduction to Logic
Simple Example
Problem: Check whether a student has passed.
If marks >= 40
Student has Passed
Else
Student has Failed
Here, the condition marks >= 40 represents the logical decision.
Key Idea
Logic provides the reasoning behind a solution, while programming provides the implementation of that solution.
Importance of Logic in Problem Solving
Why is Logic Important?
Logic is the foundation of effective problem solving and programming.
1. Helps Understand the Problem
Logic helps identify:
Inputs
Outputs
Conditions
Relationships
Constraints
2. Helps Design Solutions
Before writing code, we need to determine the correct sequence of actions.
3. Helps Make Decisions
Programs frequently need to make decisions.
Importance of Logic in Problem Solving
4. Helps Reduce Errors

Logical thinking allows us to identify incorrect conditions and missing cases before implementation.
5. Helps Develop Efficient Algorithms
Good logic can lead to:
Fewer steps
Less processing
Better performance
Easier maintenance
Logic in Everyday Life
Logic is Not Limited to Programming
We use logic in our daily lives without realizing it.
Conclusion: The same logical thinking used in daily decision-making is used to design computer programs.
Logical Thinking in Programming
How Logic Becomes a Program
A programmer generally follows this path (refer the right image):
Example
Problem: Determine whether a person can vote.
Logic:
If age >= 18
Eligible
Else
Not Eligible
Positive Logic
What is Positive Logic?
Positive logic is a logical representation in which the active or ON state is represented by 1 (HIGH) and the inactive or OFF state
is represented by 0 (LOW).
Representation
Positive Logic
Example
Suppose a switch controls a light:
Switch = 1 → Light ON
Switch = 0 → Light OFF
Software Example
Consider a variable:
isLoggedIn = 1
This can represent:
User is logged in → TRUE
Similarly:
isLoggedIn = 0
means:
User is not logged in → FALSE
In positive logic:
1 represents the active/true state, while 0 represents the inactive/false state.

Positive Logic: Examples
Example 1 – Security System
1 → Alarm Active
0 → Alarm Inactive
Example 2 – Login System
1 → Login Successful
0 → Login Failed
Example 3 – Machine Status
1 → Machine Running
0 → Machine Stopped
Example 4 – Sensor
1 → Object Detected
0 → Object Not Detected
Positive logic is intuitive because the value 1 directly represents the active or TRUE condition.
Negative Logic
What is Negative Logic?
Negative logic is a logical representation in which the active or ON state is represented by 0 (LOW) and the inactive or OFF state
is represented by 1 (HIGH).
Representation
Negative Logic
Example
Suppose a control signal is active-low:
Signal = 0 → Device ON
Signal = 1 → Device OFF
Here, the system becomes active when the signal is LOW.
Why is it called Negative Logic?
Because the logical meaning is inverted compared with positive logic.
Positive Logic vs Negative Logic
Positive Logic vs Negative Logic
Simple Visualization
POSITIVE LOGIC
1 IIIIII ON
0 IIIIII OFF
NEGATIVE LOGIC
0 IIIIII ON
1 IIIIII OFF
Important Note
The concept of positive and negative logic is particularly important in digital electronics and hardware control signals. In ordinary
high-level programming, Boolean true and false are normally treated independently of electrical HIGH/LOW conventions.
Problem-Solving Tools
Tools Used for Problem Solving
Before writing a program, programmers commonly represent the solution using structured problem-solving tools.

Two Important Tools
1. Algorithm
A step-by-step procedure for solving a problem.
2. Flowchart
A graphical representation of the steps of an algorithm.
What is an Algorithm?
Definition of Algorithm
An algorithm is a finite sequence of clear, well-defined steps used to solve a problem or perform a task.
Simple Definition
Algorithm = Step-by-step procedure to solve a problem.
Example
Problem: Calculate the area of a rectangle.
What is an Algorithm?
Example
Problem: Calculate the area of a rectangle.
Step 1: Start
Step 2: Read length L
Step 3: Read width W
Step 4: Calculate Area = L × W
Step 5: Display Area
Step 6: Stop
Characteristics of a Good Algorithm
A good algorithm should have the following characteristics:
1. Input: An algorithm may accept zero or more inputs.
2. Output: It should produce at least one meaningful result.
3. Definiteness: Every step must be clear and unambiguous.
4. Finiteness: The algorithm must terminate after a finite number of steps.
5. Effectiveness: Each step should be simple enough to be executed practically.
6. Correctness: The algorithm should produce the correct result for valid inputs.
Advantages of Algorithms
Why Do We Write Algorithms?
1. Easy to Understand
The solution is represented as a sequence of steps.
2. Language Independent
An algorithm does not depend on C, Java, Python, etc.
3. Helps Before Coding
It allows programmers to design the solution before writing code.
4. Easier Debugging
Logical errors can be identified before implementation.
5. Easier Communication
Developers can discuss the solution without focusing on programming syntax.
6. Easy Conversion to Code

An algorithm can be converted into almost any suitable programming language.
Algorithm vs Pseudocode
An algorithm is a conceptual, step-by-step logic used to solve a problem, whereas pseudocode is a text-based representation o
Think of an algorithm as the actual blueprint or recipe in your mind, while pseudocode is the written draft using simple word
Algorithm vs Pseudocode
Algorithm Example: Even or Odd
Problem
Determine whether a given number is even or odd.
Algorithm
Step 1: Start
Step 2: Read N
Step 3: Calculate R = N % 2
Step 4: If R = 0, then go to Step 5; otherwise, go to Step 7
Step 5: Display "Even"
Step 6: Go to Step 8
Step 7: Display "Odd"
Step 8: Stop
What is a Flowchart?
A flowchart is a graphical representation of an algorithm using standardized symbols and arrows to show the sequence of
operations.
Why Use Flowcharts?
Flowcharts help us:
Visualize the solution.
Understand the sequence of operations.
Identify decisions and conditions.
Communicate the solution easily.
Find logical errors.
Explain algorithms to others.
Problem
↓
Algorithm
↓
Flowchart
↓
Program
What is a Flowchart?
Flowchart Example: Add Two Numbers
Algorithm vs Flowchart
Common Mistakes in Logic and Flowcharts
Mistakes to Avoid
Logical Mistakes
Incorrect condition
Missing condition
Wrong sequence of steps
Infinite loop
Incorrect calculation
Ignoring special cases

Mistakes to Avoid
Flowchart Mistakes
Missing Start/Stop
Incorrect symbols
Missing arrows
Decision without Yes/No paths
Confusing process and decision symbols
Flowchart does not match the algorithm
From Problem to Program
Algorithm, Flowchart & Pseudocode
Problem: Calculate the Average of Three Numbers
1. Algorithm
Step 1: Start
Step 2: Read three numbers A, B, and C
Step 3: Calculate the sum: SUM = A + B + C
Step 4: Calculate the average: AVG = SUM / 3
Step 5: Display AVG
Step 6: Stop
Algorithm, Flowchart & Pseudocode
Problem: Calculate the Average of Three Numbers
2. Pseudocode
BEGIN
    READ A, B, C
    SUM ← A + B + C
    AVG ← SUM / 3
    DISPLAY AVG
END
Algorithm, Flowchart & Pseudocode
Problem: Calculate the Average of Three Numbers
3. Flowchart (On right side)
Note: Important Message
Students should understand that coding is not the first step.
First think → then design → then code.
Common Mistakes in Logic and Flowcharts
Example
Incorrect:
Check age
↓
Eligible
There is no condition or alternative path.
Example
Correct:
Age >= 18?
/ \
Yes No

↓ ↓
Eligible Not Eligible
Examples of Flowchart & Algorithms
1. Electricity Bill Calculator
Problem:
Write an algorithm and draw a flowchart to calculate the electricity bill based on the number of units consumed.
Example rule:
Up to 100 units → I5 per unit
101–200 units → I7 per unit
Above 200 units → I10 per unit
Examples of Flowchart & Algorithms
Algorithm
Step 1: Start.
Step 2: Read the number of units consumed, U.
Step 3: Check if U ≤ 100.
If Yes, calculate:
Bill = U × 5
If No, go to Step 4.
Step 4: Check if U ≥ 101 AND U ≤ 200.
If Yes, calculate:
Bill = U × 7
If No, go to Step 5.
Step 5: Calculate:
Bill = U × 10
Step 6: Display the electricity bill, Bill.
Step 7: Stop.
Examples of Flowchart & Algorithms
2. ATM Withdrawal
Problem:
Write an algorithm and draw a flowchart for an ATM withdrawal system.
Conditions:
Read account balance and withdrawal amount.
If withdrawal amount is greater than balance → Display "Insufficient Balance".
Otherwise, deduct the amount and display the remaining balance.
Example:
Balance = I10,000, Withdrawal = I3,500
Output: Remaining Balance = I6,500
Examples of Flowchart & Algorithms
Algorithm
Step 1: Start.
Step 2: Read the account balance, Balance.
Step 3: Read the withdrawal amount, Withdrawal.

Step 4: Check if Withdrawal > Balance.
If Yes, display "Insufficient Balance" and go to Step 7.
If No, go to Step 5.
Step 5: Calculate the remaining balance:
Remaining Balance = Balance − Withdrawal
Step 6: Display Remaining Balance.
Step 7: Stop.
Examples of Flowchart & Algorithms
3. Movie Ticket Price Calculator
Problem:
Write an algorithm and draw a flowchart to calculate the movie ticket price based on the person's age.
Conditions:
Age below 5 → Free
Age 5–17 → I100
Age 18–59 → I200
Age 60 or above → I120
Example:
Age = 65
Output: Ticket Price = I120
Examples of Flowchart & Algorithms
Algorithm
Step 1: Start.
Step 2: Read the person's age, Age.
Step 3: Check if Age < 5.
If Yes, set Ticket Price = I0 (Free) and go to Step 7.
If No, go to Step 4.
Step 4: Check if Age ≥ 5 AND Age ≤ 17.
If Yes, set Ticket Price = I100 and go to Step 7.
If No, go to Step 5.
Step 5: Check if Age ≥ 18 AND Age ≤ 59.
If Yes, set Ticket Price = I200 and go to Step 7.
If No, go to Step 6.
Step 6: Set Ticket Price = I120.
Step 7: Display Ticket Price.
Step 8: Stop.
Introduction to Computer-Based Problem Solving
What is Computer-Based Problem Solving?
Computer-based problem solving is the process of using a computer, programming language, and systematic problem-solving
techniques to develop a solution to a problem.
The computer does not directly understand a real-world problem. The problem must first be converted into a form that can be
processed by a computer.
Introduction to Computer-Based Problem Solving
Example

Real-world problem: Calculate the electricity bill.
The problem is converted into:
Input → Units consumed
Processing → Apply billing rules
Output → Total bill amount
Computer-based problem solving converts a real-world problem into computational steps that a computer can execute.
Why Do We Need Programming Languages?
Importance of Programming Languages
Computers understand instructions in machine language, which consists of binary values such as 0 and 1.
Humans, however, find machine language difficult to write and understand.
Programming languages provide a bridge between human thinking and computer execution.
Evolution of Programming Languages
Evolution of Programming Languages
Programming languages have evolved to make software development easier, faster, and more reliable.
1. Machine Language
Uses binary instructions.
10110000 01100001
Difficult for humans.
2. Assembly Language
Uses symbolic instructions.
MOV AX, 5
ADD AX, 10
Evolution of Programming Languages
3. High-Level Languages
Closer to human language.
sum = a + b;
Examples: C, C++, Java and Python
4. Modern Languages
Designed for specific domains and modern software development.
Examples: Python → AI/Data Science, JavaScript → Web, Swift → iOS, Kotlin → Android, R → Statistical Computing
Importance of Studying Programming Languages
Why Should We Study Programming Languages?
Learning programming languages is important because it develops both programming ability and computational thinking.
1. Converts Logic into Programs
How to convert algorithms into executable code.
2. Develops Computational Thinking
Programming encourages to:
Break problems into smaller parts.
Identify patterns.
Develop algorithms.
Think logically.
Importance of Studying Programming Languages
3. Provides Knowledge of Different Programming Paradigms
Students can understand approaches such as:
Procedural Programming

Object-Oriented Programming
Event-Driven Programming
4. Helps Choose the Right Tool
Different problems require different languages.
5. Improves Career Opportunities
Programming knowledge is essential in areas such as:
Software Development
Data Science
Artificial Intelligence
Cybersecurity
Web Development
Mobile Development
Programming Language Selection
Does One Programming Language Solve Every Problem?
-> No.
Different programming languages have different strengths.
Role and Impact of Programming Languages
Programming languages influence how software is: Designed, Developed, Tested , Maintained and Optimized
Major Roles
1. Problem Implementation
Converts algorithms into executable programs.
2. Software Development
Used to create applications, websites, operating systems, and other software.
3. Automation
Allows repetitive tasks to be performed automatically.
4. Data Processing
Enables computers to process and analyze large amounts of data.
5. Communication with Hardware
Languages such as C and C++ are widely used for systems and embedded programming.
Impact of Programming Languages
The choice of programming language can affect:
1. Performance
Some languages are better suited for high-performance applications.
2. Development Speed
High-level languages can reduce the amount of code required.
3. Security
Language features can influence how easily certain programming errors occur.
4. Maintainability
Readable and well-structured languages can make software easier to maintain.
5. Portability
Some languages allow programs to run across different operating systems and platforms.
6. Ecosystem

Libraries, frameworks, tools, and community support influence development productivity.
Programming Environment
A programming environment is a collection of software tools and facilities that help programmers write, compile, execute, test,
debug, and maintain programs.
1. Compiler: A compiler translates the entire program at once into a standalone file before running, making execution faster.
2. Interpreter: An interpreter translates and runs code line by line during runtime, making debugging easier
Programming Environment
1. How a Compiler Works
Full Translation: Reads and converts the entire source code into machine code all at once before execution.
Creates Files: Generates a separate, standalone executable file (like an .exe file).
Execution Speed: Runs much faster because the translation is already finished.
Error Reporting: Displays all syntax errors together after scanning the entire code.
Examples: C, C++, and Go.
2. How an Interpreter Works
Line-by-Line: Translates and executes the code one line at a time as the program runs.
No File Created: Does not generate a separate permanent machine code file.
Execution Speed: Runs slower because translation happens simultaneously during runtime.
Error Reporting: Stops or reports errors instantly as it encounters them on a specific line.
Examples: Python, JavaScript, and Ruby.
Integrated Development Environment (IDE)
An Integrated Development Environment (IDE) is a software application that combines several programming tools into a single
environment.
Typical IDE Features
Code Editor
Syntax Highlighting
Auto-completion
Compiler/Interpreter Integration
Debugger
Project Management
Error Detection
Build Tools
Version Control Integration
Without IDE:
Editor → Compiler → Terminal → Debugger
Program Design
Program design is the process of planning the structure, logic, data, and steps of a program before implementation.
The goal is to create a solution that is:
Correct
Efficient
Understandable
Maintainable
Testable
Can anyone draw a Program Design Process?

Program Design Example
Problem
Develop a program that accepts marks and determines the student's grade.
Step 1 – Input
Marks
Step 2 – Processing
Determine grade based on marks.
Example:
90–100 → A
80–89 → B
70–79 → C
60–69 → D
< 60 → F
Step 3 – Output
Grade
Step 4 – Logic
Read marks
↓
Check range
↓
Determine grade
↓
Display grade
Step 5
Convert the logic into:
Algorithm → Flowchart → Pseudocode → Program
Program Design and Implementation Issues
Before implementing a program, programmers need to consider several issues.
1. Correctness: Does the program produce the expected result?
2. Efficiency: Does it use reasonable: 1) Time? 2)Memory? 3)CPU resources?
3. Scalability: Can the program handle increasing amounts of data or users?
4. Maintainability: Can developers easily modify and update the program?
5. Reliability: Does the program behave consistently?
6. Usability: Can users understand and operate the system easily?
7. Security: Does the program protect data and prevent unauthorized access?
Implementation Issues
Even a well-designed solution can face problems during implementation.
Common Issues
Syntax errors
Logical errors
Runtime errors
Incorrect input handling

Memory problems
Performance problems
Poor error handling
Security vulnerabilities
Compatibility issues
Implementation Issues
Types of Errors
Syntax Error
printf("Hello"
Missing “);”
Logical Error
average = total * count;
The intended operation should be division.
Runtime Error
Example:
Division by zero
Key Point
Testing and debugging are essential parts of implementation.
What is Pseudocode?
Pseudocode is an informal, structured representation of an algorithm written using simple English-like statements and
programming concepts.
It describes what the program should do without following the exact syntax of a particular programming language.
Example
Problem:
Find the larger of two numbers.
What is Pseudocode?
START
READ A
READ B
IF A > B THEN
    DISPLAY A
ELSE
    DISPLAY B
END IF
STOP
Important Characteristics
Easy to understand.
Language independent.
Focuses on logic rather than syntax.
Easy to convert into actual program code.
Pseudocode Keywords
There is no single universal syntax for pseudocode. Different textbooks and organizations may use slightly different conventions.
START
    READ number
    IF number > 0 THEN
        DISPLAY "Positive"
    ELSE
        DISPLAY "Not Positive"
    END IF
STOP
Pseudocode Example: Find Largest of Three Numbers
START
READ A, B, C
IF A >= B AND A >= C THEN
    largest = A

ELSE IF B >= A AND B >= C THEN
    largest = B
ELSE
    largest = C
END IF
DISPLAY largest
STOP
Pseudocode with Repetition
Example: Calculate Sum of First N Numbers
Problem
Calculate:
1 + 2 + 3 + ... + N
START
READ N
SET sum = 0
SET i = 1
WHILE i <= N
    sum = sum + i
    i = i + 1
END WHILE
DISPLAY sum
STOP
Algorithm vs Pseudocode vs Flowchart
Advantages and Limitations of Pseudocode
Advantages
Easy to read.
Easy to modify.
Language independent.
Focuses on problem logic.
Helps detect logical errors.
Makes communication easier.
Easy to convert into code.
Limitations
No universally standardized syntax.
Different people may write it differently.
Cannot be directly executed by a computer.
May become ambiguous if poorly written.
Complex systems may require additional design documentation.

UNIT 1 — EXAM REVISION CHECKLIST
• Problem solving: definition, importance, real-world examples and characteristics of a good problem solver
• Skills required for software engineers: technical, problem-solving and soft skills
• Problems: current state, desired state, constraints and solution
• Social, management and computational problems; comparison and examples
• Computational problem types: decision, searching, sorting, counting and optimization
• Problem-solving life cycle: identification → analysis → design → algorithm → flowchart/pseudocode → coding →
testing/debugging → deployment → maintenance
• Logic: meaning, importance, everyday logic and logic in programming
• Positive and negative logic, active/inactive states and examples
• Algorithms: definition, characteristics, advantages and examples
• Flowcharts: definition, uses, symbols, examples and common mistakes
• Algorithm vs pseudocode vs flowchart
• Pseudocode: definition, characteristics, keywords, examples, repetition, advantages and limitations
• Computer-based problem solving: input → processing → output
• Programming languages: machine, assembly, high-level and modern/domain-specific languages
• Programming language selection, roles, impact and applications
• Programming environments: compiler, interpreter and IDE
• Program design: input, processing, output and logic
• Implementation issues: correctness, efficiency, scalability, maintainability, reliability, usability and security
• Errors: syntax, logical and runtime errors